**Chris Maxwell**

**[Abundance Not Linked to Survival across the End-Cretaceous Mass Extinction:
Patterns in North American Bivalves
Rowan Lockwood Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, Vol. 100, No. 5. (Mar. 4, 2003), pp. 2478-2482.](https://github.com/aazaff/teachPaleobiology/blob/master/WritingExercises/Lockwood%202003.pdf**

#### Article Summary
Lockwood investigates the relationship between abundance of taxa in the fossil record and survivability across the K/T mass extinction. The author first explains that ecological studies within live organisms have shown that abundant species are less likely to go extinct than rarer ones.  Lockwood then connects this idea to the fossil record by citing research showing that the abundance of the living community of benthic mollusks and the mollusks preserved in the fossil record are correlated.  Abundance information from the costal plain of North America was complied from published data.  Abundance was measured in three ways: raw, which was measured as the number of valves at a locality, rank, which ranks genera according to their rank of abundance in the assemblage, and proportional, which is the raw abundance relative to the total abundance of the preserved community.  Lockwood found that no correlation existed between the abundance of taxa and survivability in any of the abundance metrics across the K/T extinction and therefore concluded that the factors involved in mass extinction events are different from factors involved in background extinction.

#### Things you liked about the paper
The introduction of the paper is well written and concise.  Lockwood sets up the question to be solved with sufficient detail, yet does not bog the reader down with extra material. Lockwood simply states that there has not been much investigation about species abundance correlating with extinction within the fossil record.  The research question is developed clearly and its importance is backed up by previous literature. The methods of grouping data are explained well and seem to be eloquent ways of determining the relationship between abundance and extinction. The results are simple and definitive; Lockwood found that there is no correlation between the abundance of a species and whether it survived. 

The author then examined other explanations for the lack of correlation.  First, that sampling bias skewed the results due to rare taxa.  Second, that spatial or temporal differences would cause the true signal to be hidden.  Third, that some taxa are more likely preserved than others.  And fourth, the behavioral or physical factors of the organisms being counted.  These four concerns are all clearly addressed and refuted before the author concludes that a correlation does not exist.

#### Things you did not like about the paper

One question I have is why this research did not also investigate background extinction in mollusks.  The fact that species with low abundances have a higher chance of going extinct now does not necessarily mean that abundance and extinction were correlated in the past.  In addition, if there is some sort of bias in the data, it may be seen through an investigation of the background extinction.  If we were to see that abundance does factor into background extinction in the fossil record then those results would support this study.  On the other hand, if no correlation was found then either extinction was different in the Cretaceous than today, there is a problem with the fossil record. It is also a bit overly broad to conclude that mass extinctions are different from background intervals, as it could be *just* the end-Cretaceous that is unique.

#### Evaluate the graphs and figures (if any)
The two graphs of this paper are easy to read and interpret.  The bar graphs with the large error bars show how similar the survivorship and extinction rate is in a very understandable manner.  I thought the chart was cluttered and difficult to read, however this information was explained successfully in the body of the paper.  Overall this paper was easy to follow and was concise while giving the reader the necessary detail and background information to understand the study.
